Doc: various cleanup and update build recipes (#1213)
nomacs/nomacs: README.md

# nomacs - Image Lounge 🍸

nomacs is a free, open source image viewer, which supports multiple platforms. You can use it for viewing all common image formats including RAW and psd images. nomacs is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3 and available for Windows, Linux, FreeBSD, Mac, Haiku, and OS/2.

[![Build status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/ye6wd1hap4cebyo8?svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/novomesk/nomacs)
[![Downloads](https://img.shields.io/github/downloads/nomacs/nomacs/total.svg)](https://github.com/nomacs/nomacs/releases/latest)
[![Crowdin](https://badges.crowdin.net/nomacs/localized.svg)](http://translate.nomacs.org/project/nomacs)

## Get the Source

```console

> git clone https://github.com/nomacs/nomacs.git
> cd nomacs
> git submodule init
> git submodule update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
git clone https://github.com/nomacs/nomacs.git
cd nomacs

# nomacs uses submodules for third party libraries
git submodule init
git submodule update
```

- check if your Qt is set correctly (otherwise set the path to `qt_install_dir/qtbase/bin/qmake.exe`)
- check if your builds proceeded correctly

## Build nomacs (Linux/Unix)

Before you build nomacs, please note the following:

> - We recommend using the Qt6 version of nomacs. However, you may want to match the Qt version of your desktop environment (e.g. KDE in 24.04 is Qt5-based).
> - [kimageformats-plugins](https://github.com/KDE/kimageformats) provides additional formats (AVIF,HEIC/HEIF) and is sometimes only available for the Qt5 version. Otherwise, you must compile it separately.
> - Zip file support requires Quazip, which has varied support in distributions. If the system package is missing or does not work, you can set `USE_SYSTEM_QUAZIP=NO` to use the version in nomacs/3rdparty. However, you may also need to remove the any system quazip development package temporarily. (`llibquazip*-dev`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We recommend using the Qt6 version of nomacs. However, you may want to match the Qt version of your desktop environment (e.g. KDE in Ubuntu 24.04 is Qt5-based).
- [kimageformats-plugins](https://github.com/KDE/kimageformats) is an optional dependency that provides additional formats such as AVIF and HEIC/HEIF. The Qt version of the plugins should match the Qt version when compiling nomacs.
- Zip file support requires Quazip, which has varied support in distributions. If the system package is missing or does not work, you can set `USE_SYSTEM_QUAZIP=NO` to use the version in nomacs/3rdparty. However, you may also need to remove the any system quazip development package temporarily. (such as `llibquazip*-dev` for Ubuntu)
```

### Get the required packages

#### Ubuntu 24.04

```console
# qt6
sudo apt install qt6-base-dev qt6-tools-dev qt6-svg-dev qt6-image-formats-plugins libexiv2-dev libraw-dev libopencv-dev libtiff-dev libtiff-dev libquazip1-qt6-dev build-essential git cmake lcov libgtest-dev

# qt5
# note: cmake configuration will fail if libquazip1-qt6-dev is also installed; or you can use USE_SYSTEM_QUAZIP=OFF
sudo apt install qtbase5-dev qttools5-dev libqt5svg5-dev qt5-image-formats-plugins libexiv2-dev libraw-dev libopencv-dev libtiff-dev libtiff-dev libquazip1-qt5-dev build-essential git cmake lcov libgtest-dev kimageformat-plugins
```

#### Ubuntu 22.04

```console
# qt6
sudo apt install qt6-base-dev qt6-tools-dev qt6-tools-dev-tools libqt6svg6-dev libqt6core5compat6-dev qt6-l10n-tools qt6-image-formats-plugins libexiv2-dev libraw-dev libopencv-dev libtiff-dev libtiff-dev build-essential git cmake lcov libgtest-dev libgl-dev

# qt5
sudo apt install qtbase5-dev qttools5-dev libqt5svg5-dev qt5-image-formats-plugins libexiv2-dev libraw-dev libopencv-dev libtiff-dev libtiff-dev libquazip5-dev build-essential git cmake lcov libgtest-dev kimageformat-plugins
```

#### Arch

```console
# qt6

> sudo pacman --sync qt6-base qt6-imageformats qt6-svg qt6-tools quazip-qt6 kimageformats exiv2 libraw libtiff opencv kimageformats git cmake gtest base-devel make

Reviewer: I think it's more often written as `-S` than `--sync`. Also, `make` is already in `base-devel`.

```suggestion
sudo pacman -S qt6-base qt6-imageformats qt6-svg qt6-tools quazip-qt6 exiv2 libraw libtiff opencv kimageformats git cmake gtest base-devel
```

# qt5
sudo dnf install qt5-qtbase-devel qt5-qtimageformats qt5-qtsvg-devel qt5-qttools-devel LibRaw-devel opencv-devel exiv2-devel libtiff-devel git cmake lcov gtest-devel gcc-c++ quazip-qt5-devel
```

#### FreeBSD (14.2 release)

```
# qt6
sudo pkg install qt6-base qt6-imageformats qt6-svg qt6-5compat qt6-tools quazip-qt6 tiff exiv2 kf6-kimageformats libraw opencv git cmake googletest gcc

#qt5
sudo pkg install qt5-gui qt5-imageformats
qt5-svg qt5-linguisttools qt5-qmake qt5-buildtools qt5-uitools qt5-concurrent quazip-qt5 tiff exiv2 kf5-kimageformats libraw opencv git cmake googletest gcc
```

#### Haiku (r1 beta 5)
```console
# qt6
pkgman install qt6_base_devel qt6_tools_devel qt6_svg_devel qt6_5compat_devel quazip1_qt6_devel tiff_devel libraw_devel opencv_devel gtest_devel exiv2_devel kimageformats6 qt6_imageformats cake git gcc make pkgconfig lcms_devel
```

### Configure nomacs

Nomacs is configured with cmake. These cmake options are often needed:
- QT_VERSION_MAJOR=[5|6] - Default 5, 6 recommended

> - ENABLE_QUAZIP=[ON|OFF] - Default OFF, ON recommended
> - USE_SYSTEM_QUAZIP=[ON|OFF] - Default ON, recommended
> - CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=[Debug|Release|RelWithDebInfo] - Debug builds have more logging as well as debug symbols.

Reviewer: I suggest removing the recommendations here because quazip is an optional dependency.

```suggestion
- ENABLE_QUAZIP=[ON|OFF] - Default OFF
- USE_SYSTEM_QUAZIP=[ON|OFF] - Default ON
- CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=[Debug|Release|RelWithDebInfo] - For normal usage, choose `RelWithDebInfo`. For development, `Debug` builds have more logging as well as debug symbols.
```

Author: I don't feel RellWithDebInfo is worthwhile, as it will build debug symbols.. but I guess they could appear in crash reports. Is that your thinking?

Reviewer: Yes, stack traces will be available if the build has debug symbols.

```console
cd nomacs
mkdir build
cd build

> cmake -D QT_VERSION_MAJOR=5 -D ENABLE_QUAZIP=ON -D USE_SYSTEM_QUAZIP=ON ../ImageLounge

Reviewer: I suggest removing the `-D` options because (1) Qt6 is recommended above so make it consistent and (2) quazip is an optional dependency.

```suggestion
cmake ../ImageLounge
```

```

### Compile nomacs

```console
make [-j 8]
```

You will now have a binary (~/nomacs/build/nomacs), which you can use directly, however you may need to set LD_LIBRARY_PATH for this to work. You can check the log output to see that nomacs is loading configuration files from the expected locations.

```console
# running nomacs from ~/nomacs/build/
LD_LIBRARY_PATH=.:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH ./nomacs
```

## Build and run tests

> Nomacs uses googletest (libgtest-dev), this is included in package lists above. A `check`target will be created if GoogleTest is present. To build and run tests:

Reviewer: I would avoid using Ubuntu package names if this section is for generic Linux.

```suggestion
Nomacs uses [GoogleTest](https://github.com/google/googletest), which is included in the package lists above. A `check` target will be created if GoogleTest is present. To build and run tests:
```

```bash
make check
```

### Install nomacs

By default nomacs is installed to /usr/local/ unless you set `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX`

```console
sudo make install
# ldconfig is required on most linux distros
# Some systems you also require changes to 
# `/etc/ld.so.conf` to add `/usr/local/lib` 
sudo ldconfig
```

### For Package Maintainers

> - Recommended additional packages: kimageformats provides HEIF/HEIC and AVIF image loading, and many others

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Recommended optional dependency: kimageformats provides HEIF/HEIC and AVIF image loading, and many others
```

- check if your Qt is set correctly (otherwise set the path to `qt_install_dir/qtbase/bin/qmake.exe`)
- check if your builds proceeded correctly

## Build nomacs (Linux/Unix)

Before you build nomacs, please note the following:

- We recommend using the Qt6 version of nomacs. However, you may want to match the Qt version of your desktop environment (e.g. KDE in Ubuntu 24.04 is Qt5-based).

> - [kimageformats-plugins](https://github.com/KDE/kimageformats) is an optional dependency that provides additional formats such as AVIF and HEIC/HEIF. The Qt version of the plugins should match the Qt version when compiling nomacs.

Reviewer 2: The original repo is https://invent.kde.org/frameworks/kimageformats

You can mention also JPEG XL (JXL) format which is also supported by kimageformats.

- Zip file support requires Quazip, which has varied support in distributions. If the system package is missing or does not work, you can set `USE_SYSTEM_QUAZIP=NO` to use the version in nomacs/3rdparty. However, you may also need to remove the any system quazip development package temporarily. (such as `llibquazip*-dev` for Ubuntu)

### Get the required packages

The package lists and cmake configuration listed below enable all features in nomacs, which we recommend. However, if you do not want a particular feature you can omit certain packages.

This is the list of configurable packages and what they provide in nomacs. If you want to be sure a feature is included/excluded set the cmake option for that feature. By default, all features are enabled if the dependencies are met**.

| Package | Required | Depends | cmake | Description
| -       | -        | -       | -     | -
| Qt      |  Yes     |         | `QT_VERSION_MAJOR` | Qt components: Core, Concurrent, Network, PrintSupport, SVG, Widgets, Core5Compat
| LibRAW  |  No      | OpenCV  | `ENABLE_RAW`       | Enables reading RAW images

> | LibTiff |  No      | OpenCV  | `ENABLE_TIFF`      | Enable reading multi-page TIFF

Reviewer: Do these two libraries depend on OpenCV?

Author: LibRAW definitely does. LibTiff I'm not sure, it was not clear from scanning the code for `WITH_LIBTIFF`, however it is a cmake dependency. Maybe that is outdated.

Reviewer: Could you confirm? The libraw packages in Ubuntu and Arch also do not list opencv as a dependency.

https://www.libraw.org/docs/Install-LibRaw.html
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f6b6f8c9-f6bf-4abb-ae75-b7b656053d78)

Author: To clarify, the dependency is in nomacs itself, not the library. In otherwords, OpenCV is integral to how we use LibRAW.

As for tiff,

`cmake -DENABLE_OPENCV=OFF -DENABLE_RAW=OFF -DENABLE_TIFF=ON  ../ImageLounge/`

Does not work; however it might be made to work easily. I did not check functionality, but simply removing the check from Unix.cmake and the includes in DkBasicLoader.cpp allowed it to compile. Now, for the page extraction plugin, which I believe takes advantage of multi-page TIFF support, that might be another story.

Reviewer: >To clarify, the dependency is in nomacs itself, not the library. In otherwords, OpenCV is integral to how we use LibRAW.

The current wording did not look like that. I would probably invert the table if that is the intent.

```md
#### Build options and their dependencies

The following Qt components are necessary: Core, Concurrent, Network, PrintSupport, SVG, Widgets, Core5Compat.

There are other optional features that can be enabled during build:

| Option             | Depends on     | Requires        | Description
| ------------------ | -------------- | --------------- | -
| `ENABLE_RAW`       | LibRAW         | `ENABLE_OPENCV` | Enables reading RAW images
| `ENABLE_TIFF`      | LibTiff        | `ENABLE_OPENCV` | Enable reading multi-page TIFF
| `ENABLE_QUAZIP`    | Quazip**       |                 | Enable reading from zip files
| `ENABLE_OPENCV`    | OpenCV         |                 | RAW, TIFF, Adjustments, High-quality thumbnails, DRIF files, histogram, mosaic
| `ENABLE_PLUGINS`   | nomacs/plugins | `ENABLE_OPENCV` | Paint on image, Composite, Affine Transform, Fake Miniatures, Page Extraction
| `ENABLE_TESTING`   | GoogleTest     |                 | Enables `make check` target for unit testing

#### Runtime dependencies

- Corresponding libraries for the enabled options.
- QImageFormats: Enables reading ICNS, MNG, TGA, TIFF, WBMP, WEBP
- KImageFormats: Enables reading AVIF, HEIF/HEIC, JXL, EXR, EPS and [more](https://github.com/KDE/kimageformats)

```

| Quazip**|  No      |         | `ENABLE_QUAZIP`    | Enable reading from zip files
| OpenCV  |  No      |         | `ENABLE_OPENCV`    | RAW, TIFF, Adjustments, High-quality thumbnails, DRIF files, histogram, mosaic
| nomacs/plugins| No | OpenCV  | `ENABLE_PLUGINS`   | Paint on image, Composite, Affine Transform, Fake Miniatures, Page Extraction
| googletest    | No |         | `ENABLE_TESTING`   | Enables `make check` target for unit testing
| QImageFormats | No |         | n/a                | Enables reading ICNS, MNG, TGA, TIFF, WBMP, WEBP
| KImageFormats | No |         | n/a                | Enables reading AVIF, HEIF/HEIC, JXL, EXR, EPS and [more](https://github.com/KDE/kimageformats)

> (**) Quazip is not enabled by default as of nomacs 3.19.1, this may change in a future update.

Reviewer: I think this is a breaking change and we should not do this unless necessary.

Author: I assume you mean making quazip default enabled. I'm not advocating that we do this anytime soon,  but  I do not think it would break much and the trend seems to be always enabling it.

d7e555f878597fdb was the last to disable quazip (it has gone back and forth a few times) , but it is not clear to me why  (@novomesk  might remember why). Since then we have updated 3rdparty/quazip.

- It is a somewhat unique feature, I believe one significant reason users select nomacs over other viewers
- Quazip1 seems to be present in all distros now
- Most maintainers  seem to be setting ENABLE_QUAZIP=ON already (they were on 3.17 too). 
- Quazip < 0.7.6 had a CVE which we resolved by updating the submodule
- We fixed the build so  USE_SYSTEM_QUAZIP works on everything again

sudo make install
```

> If you want to have an independent bundle image (`nomacs.dmg`) you c
> an create it by using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to have an independent bundle image (`nomacs.dmg`) you can create it by using
```
